---
title: "Word2vec: Sci-fi Literature before 1930s and after 1950s"
date: 2024-12-17
layout: post
category: project
tags: [Python, Practice]
---

This project uses word embedding vector to reveal the differences between the sci-fi novels before 1930s and after 1950s. Specifically, I analyzed the top 15 most similar vectors with the vector of the word "scientific". The more similar two vectors are, the more close their meanings are.

The data source is [Gutengerg database](https://www.gutenberg.org/). It provides a python API but I cannot make it work on my device. So I wrote a crawling script to acquire the data I need. Basically I need two variables: the summary of the book (which is auto-generated by Gutenberg) and the year the book was published. For filtering those books written in English, I also crawled the language variable. Of course you can extend my script so that it can crawl any other variables you want. 

One limitation is that, although most of those books which were uploaded recently have auto-generated summaries, those uploaded early do not have. So I can only gain around 500 books for analyzing, and there might be some potential selection bias, like the books uploaded recently propbably are less famous. 

You can find my script and results [here](/htmls/Gutenberg.html). To run this code, you need to install Selenium and Gensim (I used Python 3).

The key findings are (which, of course, need to be cross-validated by qualitative analysis):
- Before 1930s, the top 15 scientific-related words are: 'longing', 'social', 'identity', 'romance', 'roles', 'discovery', 'deeper', 'disillusionment', 'foreshadows', 'consequences', 'evolution', 'bravery', 'struggle', 'loyalty', 'technological'. It is clear that in this period, authors were more caring about individual stories and personalities, instead of focusing on technology and science itself and discussing its potential consequences.
- After 1950s, the top 15 scientific-related words are: 'morality', 'authority', 'technological', 'dangers', 'fear', 'unintended', 'versus', 'impact', 'power', 'advancement', 'boundaries', 'highlighting', 'ambition', 'personal', 'inquiry'. After 1950s, the negative (unforseen) consequences of science began to be noticed, and science tended to be constructed as a technical thing which intersecting with other societal dimentions like politics and wars (which might be caused by the cold-war ideologies).

