---
title: "Science and Technology in Science Fiction: A Pre- and Post-WWII Comparison through Word Embedding and Mixed-Method Topic Modelling"
date: 2025-02-13
layout: post
category: research
tags: [Python, Practice]
image: "/images/gutenburg_word_space.png"
---

This individual research is motivated by my previous [try](https://mooneater0912.github.io/post/2024/12/17/Gutenberg). [Here](https://mooneater0912.github.io/files/Gutengerg_extended_abstract.pdf) is it's extended abstract. The abstract was accepted into [IC2S2 2025](https://www.ic2s2-2025.org/) as a poster presentation.

In a word, this project makes a comparison between pre-WWII and post-WWII science fiction literature (roughly divided by year 1949, while the division criteria is included in the robustness checks), regarding the representation of "science and technology", using topic modelling (mixed-method-based, according to the suggestion from given research evidence) and word embedding technique. Here is a shorter abstract:

Science fiction (SiFi) research has long examined thematic shifts over time, yet two gaps remain: (1) qualitative studies often focus on select authors or periods, overlooking large-scale trends and marginalized works, and (2) there is no systematic analysis of how SiFi represents science and technology. This study addresses both issues by comparing pre- and post-WWII SiFi works using a mixed-methods topic modelling with word embedding technique. Using Gutenberg Project data (N = 852), we extracted book summaries via Python to ensure comprehensive sample set and balanced text length. We identified key thematic dimensions through inductive content analysis of 80 randomly selected summaries, then applied Correlation Explanation (CorEx) topic modeling to refine four themes along two dimensions: Individual Story vs. Macro Narrative and External Exploration vs. Internal Conflict. Word2Vec embeddings were constructed for pre- and post-WWII subsets, and cosine similarity was used to measure shifts in how SiFi associates science and technology with these themes. Results indicate that post-WWII SiFi increasingly embeds science and technology within macro-political and military narratives, whereas pre-WWII works emphasize individual heroism and cosmic exploration. This study contributes methodologically by demonstrating how topic modeling and word embeddings for auto-generated summaries can analyze literary shifts efficiently, mitigating biases from text length and sample selection. Theoretically, it quantifies SiFi’s evolving representation of science and technology, highlighting its role as a reflection of socio-political change and broader technological culture. Future research could integrate tuned LLM-generated summaries for deeper insights.

If you are interested, preliminary results (table and figures) can be seen in the extended abstract.

Next step, I will:
- Use LLMs to generate customized summaries, and compare their interpretability and accuracy with those obtained by modeling based on randomly selected paragraphs from the original text.
- Try to include more books and a longer time span to capture richer variations.

