---
title: "Mapping Algotithms from KDQoL-36 to SF-6D/EQ-5D-5L"
date: 2025-01-08
layout: post
category: research
tags: [Statistics, R, Publication, Methodology]
---

\[ a link to the article will be here after published \]

One of my first-authored article (supervised by and co-authored with [Ye Zhang](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Ye-Zhang-58)), titled **Mapping KDQoL-36 onto EQ-5D-5L and SF-6Dv2 in patients undergoing dialysis in China**, was recently accepted by *Value in Health - Regional Issues*. This study develops several models mapping KDQoL-36 (a popular QoL instrument for kidney disease patients) onto EQ-5D-5L and SF-6D v2 (the two most widely-used general QoL instruments), based on the latest Chinese value set. 

We found that, ALDVMM is the optimal algorithm for mapping onto EQ-5D-5L, while Tobit regression model is the optimal one for SF-6D v2. A potential cause is that EQ-5D-5L has more significant ceiling effect, which makes ALDVMM a more suitable tools (ALDVMM can explain multiple heterogeneous components in the distribution). Generally, we have the KDQoL-36 scales with their square effects as the optimal predicting variable set, this might be because the potential unlinear effects under the relationship between KDQoL-36 and EQ-5D/SF-6D, while our relatively small data size limits the possible number of variables to avoid the risk of over-fitting. We introduced 10-fold cross validation to enhance the generalizibility of the models, given a small dataset.

Bootstrapping estimation was also employed. By comparing the confidence intervals generated by 1000-times bootstrapping, we found that the optimal model mapping onto SF-6D has narrower confidence intervals and better predict errors than those of the optimal model mapping onto EQ-5D. Thereforte, when the accessible dataset is small (smaller than 500), we recommend to use SF-6D to measure the population's QoL.


The code of cross-validation for ALDVMM is open-sourced [here](https://github.com/MoonEater0912/ALDVMM_Cross_Validation).